feat(docs) Add rich text editing guide (#24946)
expo/expo: docs/pages/guides/editing-richtext.mdx

---
title: Editing rich text
description: Learn about current approaches to previewing and editing rich text in react-native.
---

A lot of applications need to allow users to type in text. For example, if you want to build a messaging or social media app, you will probably rely heavily on text inputs. React Native has a built-in `<TextInput>` component to implement this without much effort for many simple cases.

> Sometimes however, you need to be more flexible. Think of long social media posts, note apps or document editors. Ideally you need to allow different text styles, lists, headings, embedded images and more. This is called a rich text editor, and it’s a difficult problem to solve everywhere, including in React Native.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, sometimes you need to be more flexible. Think of long social media posts, note apps, or document editors. Ideally, you need to allow different text styles, lists, headings, embedded images, and more. This is called a rich text editor, and it’s a difficult problem to solve everywhere, including in React Native.
```

> There’s currently no obvious, default solution for that in the React Native ecosystem, but we can explore some options and promising approaches, each with their own tradeoffs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There’s currently no default solution for that in the React Native ecosystem. In this guide, we explore some options and promising approaches, each with its own tradeoffs.
```

> # Rendering rich text

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Render rich text
```

short forms instead of gerunds for section title.

> If you don’t need to actually edit rich text, just display it, there are a lot of great options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a lot of good options to display rich text:
```

Let's be concise here.

> - If you have markdown content, you can use a markdown renderer like [react-native-markdown-renderer](https://www.npmjs.com/package/react-native-markdown-renderer) or other.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For markdown content, you can use a markdown renderer such as [`react-native-markdown-renderer`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/react-native-markdown-renderer) or another.
```

> - If you have HTML content, you can use [@expo/html-elements](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@expo/html-elements) or simply a webview ([react-native-webview](https://docs.expo.dev/versions/latest/sdk/webview/)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For HTML content, you can use [`@expo/html-elements`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@expo/html-elements) or a webview ([`react-native-webview`](https://docs.expo.dev/versions/latest/sdk/webview/)).
```

> - If you have a custom format and want more control, you can take advantage of nesting `<Text>` components to render styles and layouts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- To have a custom format and more control, you can take advantage of nesting `<Text>` components to render styles and layouts.
```

  ```jsx
  <TextInput>
    <Text>
      <Text style={{ fontWeight: 900 }}>Some bold text</Text>Some regular text
    </Text>
  </TextInput>
  ```

> - You can also use [Expo Modules](/modules/overview/) to write a custom renderer component with native platform primitives such as `AttributedString` on iOS and 3rd party libraries such as [Markwon](https://github.com/noties/Markwon) on Android.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You can also use [Expo Modules](/modules/overview/) to write a custom renderer component with native platform primitives using third-party libraries such as [Markwon](https://github.com/noties/Markwon) on Android and `AttributedString` on iOS.
```

[Readjusted platform order as per our writing styleguide](https://github.com/expo/expo/blob/main/guides/Expo%20Documentation%20Writing%20Style%20Guide.md#referencing-android-ios-and-web)

> # Editing rich text

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Edit rich text
```

> There are a few possible approches to get rich text rendering to work, but all have different limitations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a few approaches to get rich text rendering to work. However, all have different limitations.
```

- Fix typo
- We can be a bit concise here

## Webview-based editors

> While most react-native UI components wrap native platform primitives and are fast, performant and “native feeling” as a result, the webview-based rich text editors use a different approach.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While most React Native UI components wrap native platform primitives and are fast, performant, and **native feeling** as a result, the webview-based rich text editors use a different approach.
```

> They wrap an existing rich text editor built for web with JavaScript inside a [react-native-webview](https://docs.expo.dev/versions/latest/sdk/webview/). It works on all platforms (Android, iOS, Web) and can take advantage of popular rich text editors available for the Web platform, but has a performance and UX penalty.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They wrap an existing rich text editor built for web with JavaScript inside a [`react-native-webview`](https://docs.expo.dev/versions/latest/sdk/webview/). It works on all platforms (Android, iOS, Web) and can take advantage of popular rich text editors available for the Web platform, but it has a performance and UX penalty.
```

You will not be able to use native UI components inside the editor. Any implementation of features like mentions or image embedding will duplicate features and require significant effort to implement.

> ### Existing webview-based react-native packages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Existing webview-based React Native libraries
```

> There are a couple of existing react-native packages to allow rich-text editing. These are the easiest option to get started if you just need a basic rich text editor with limited configurability and don’t have strict performance or UX requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are a couple of existing React Native libraries to allow rich-text editing. These are the easiest options to get started if you need a basic rich text editor with limited configuration and don’t have strict performance or UX requirements:
```

> Here are some options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

No need to have this here as the intro paragraph covers it up.

> - [react-native-rich-editor](https://github.com/wxik/react-native-rich-editor)
> - [react-native-cn-quill](https://github.com/imnapo/react-native-cn-quill)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`react-native-rich-editor`](https://github.com/wxik/react-native-rich-editor)
- [`react-native-cn-quill`](https://github.com/imnapo/react-native-cn-quill)
```

All library names when written in package format use inline syntax for consistency.

### Custom webview-based editor

> If you need more configurability, you can build a similar package on your own with an existing web only editor, but handle the message passing and web implementation yourself. This gives you all the options your underlying editor offers you and let’s you implement more features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need more configurability, you can build a similar library with an existing web-only editor. However, you have to handle the message passing and web implementation yourself. This gives you all the options that the underlying editor offers and lets you implement more features.
```

> Here are some options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- [Quill](https://quilljs.com/)
- [lexical](https://github.com/facebook/lexical)
- [slate](https://github.com/ianstormtaylor/slate)

You will need to use message passing to pass text and `onChange` events to and from the webview. Since rich texts often end up long, it’s better to model it as an uncontrolled component to prevent lag on each keystroke. Also, if you can avoid serializing and sending the entire state on each keystroke that also improves performance.

## Building on top of React Native TextInput

> Let’s discuss if a feature-complete, general purpose rich text input is possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, let's discuss if it is possible to have a feature complete rich text input for general purposes.
```

> React Native allows nested `<Text>` tags, and it even allows them to be used as children of `<TextInput>` to render and edit styled text. It even is synchronous on new react native architecture (the onChange event fires immediately after a new character is typed into the text input field).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
React Native allows nested `<Text>` components and allows them to be used as children of `<TextInput>` to render and edit styled text. It is synchronous with the new React Native architecture (the `onChange` event fires immediately after a new character is typed into the text input field).
```

Unfortunately, the `<TextInput>` component is built towards working with regular text, and it only returns a string in it’s `onTextChange` callback. This is a significant limitation.

> Here’s a quick example. If you are rendering a text input with the following content:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is a quick example. If you are rendering a text input with the following bold text:
```

> **aa**aa

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I think it is easy to read the text nesting in the code snippet below, unless I'm missing the significance of this line.

```jsx
<TextInput>
  <Text>

>     <Text style={{ fontWeight: 900 }}>aa</Text>aa

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    {/* The following will render a bold text in this format: **aa**aa */}	
    <Text style={{ fontWeight: 900 }}>aa</Text>aa
```

  </Text>
</TextInput>
```

> And you append a fifth letter a, the position of your cursor should determine if the new letter is a part of the bold string or not. Unfortunately, the callback only returns `aaaaa`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, you append a fifth letter `a`, the position of your cursor should determine if the new letter is a part of the bold string or not. Unfortunately, the callback only returns `aaaaa`.
```

> There is an additional `onSelectionChange` prop that could be use to get that information, but it makes the task significantly harder. Inserting additional characters (such as newlines for lists or bullet points) also desynchronises the selection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is an additional `onSelectionChange` prop that can be used to get that information. However,  it makes the task significantly harder. Inserting additional characters (such as newlines for lists or bullet points) also desynchronizes the selection.
```

> There are some attempts to build such an editor, such as [markdown-editor](https://github.com/shakogegia/markdown-editor) but no widely used packages exist.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are some attempts to build such an editor, such as [`markdown-editor`](https://github.com/shakogegia/markdown-editor), but no widely used packages exist.
```

## Markdown editors with always visible styling markers

> If you’re ok with using markdown to style text, you can render markdown in a separate, non-editable view while editing. Here’s a package that does that (https://github.com/kunall17/react-native-markdown-editor), but it’s also easy to build on your own using any markdown renderer.
> 
> This is an editing experience more suited to power users or programming/tech applications.
> 
> You can also explore rendering rich text while showing markdown only in the selected chunk of text or other hybrid approaches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If using a markdown to style text fulfills your requirement, you can render the markdown in a separate, non-editable view while editing. It is not complex to build on your own using any markdown renderer. You can also use a third-party library such as [`react-native-markdown-editor`](https://github.com/kunall17/react-native-markdown-editor). 

This editing experience suits power users or programming/tech applications. You can also explore rendering rich text while showing markdown only in the selected chunk of text or other hybrid approaches.
```

## Native editors

> You can consider using a native Android/iOS rich text editor wrapped into a react-native module. There are a couple of options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use a native Android or iOS rich text editor wrapped into a React Native module. There are a couple of options:
```

> - [react-native-aztec](https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/tree/trunk/packages/react-native-aztec)
> - [gutenberg-mobile](https://github.com/wordpress-mobile/gutenberg-mobile)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`react-native-aztec`](https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/tree/trunk/packages/react-native-aztec)
- [`gutenberg-mobile`](https://github.com/wordpress-mobile/gutenberg-mobile)
```

> You can also wrap any native rich text editor using [expo-modules](/modules/overview/), but if you use different ones on each platform you will need to unify their APIs and input formats somehow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also wrap any native rich text editor using [Expo Modules](/modules/overview/), but if you use different ones on each platform, you need to unify their APIs and input formats.
```

> Rich text is usually represented using [abstract syntax trees](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_syntax_tree).
>
> For example, a bullet list can be a node of type `bulleted-list` with several children of type `list-item`. You can convert both HTML and markdown to a suitable AST format.

> There is also an effort to port the lexical editor to iOS and Android and provide a react-native wrapper. You can track it here: https://github.com/facebook/lexical/discussions/2410.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is also an effort to [port the lexical editor to Android and iOS and provide a React Native wrapper](track it here: https://github.com/facebook/lexical/discussions/2410)
```

We can use the link to support the text instead of providing the link directly.

> # Summary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Summary
```

This has to be H2.

> While there are a lot of great options for showing rich text, is no one size fits all solution for rich text editing in react-native. In fact, there's even no popular solution that is sufficient in most usecases. Further contribution from the community is needed to improve existing solutions or add new ones.
> 
> For now, you need to make a careful choice between a more complex, native editor that offers more features but may be harder to maintain, or an editor built on top of react-native primitives. This depends on how core the feature is to your app, how many features you need in your editor, and how much effort are you willing to spend on building it out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While there are many great options for showing rich text, there is no one-size-fits-all solution for rich text editing in React Native. There's no popular solution that is sufficient in most use cases. Further contribution from the community is needed to improve existing solutions or add new ones.

For now, you need to carefully choose between a more complex, native editor that offers more features but may be harder to maintain or an editor built on top of react-native primitives. This depends on how core the feature is to your app, how many features you need in your editor, and how much effort you are willing to spend on building it out.
```

- Let's not overephasize the about not a common/most-used/de facto solution in the first paragraph's second line
